1. Summary

Mark Nottingham is the Document Shepherd and Working Group Chair.

This specification describes an optimized expression of the semantics of the Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP). HTTP/2 enables a more efficient use of network resources and a reduced perception of latency by introducing header field compression and allowing multiple concurrent messages on the same connection. It also introduces unsolicited push of representations from servers to clients.

This specification is an alternative to, but does not obsolete, the HTTP/1.1 message syntax. HTTP's existing semantics remain unchanged.

We intend this to be published as a Proposed Standard.


2. Review and Consensus

We have enjoyed active participation from a broad community, including browser vendors,
intermediaries (such as CDN and proxy vendors), server vendors and protocol library authors; this
includes both commercial vendors and open source libraries.

Our current implementation list is at:
  https://github.com/http2/http2-spec/wiki/Implementations
  
Additionally, we have had participation and review from the non-implementing HTTP community itself.
We have substantial external interest from the Web performance community as well.

We have also coordinated with the W3C, giving them regular updates through the liaison and the TAG.

Process-wise, we were chartered to do this work in August 2012, with a submission deadline of
November 2012. We have treated that date seriously, so as to bound the commitment of the developers
and implementers involved. As a result, we had a high frequency of interim meetings (six in two
years), used both to discuss issues and to hold interop events.

Perhaps inevitably, there have been a number of contentious issues in the development of HTTP/2.
The most notable are listed below.

# Pervasive Monitoring

BCP188 says:

  It is therefore timely to revisit the security and privacy properties of our standards.  The IETF will work to mitigate the technical aspects of PM, just as we do for protocol vulnerabilities in general. The ways in which IETF protocols mitigate PM will change over time as mitigation and attack techniques evolve and so are not described here.

  Those developing IETF specifications need to be able to describe how they have considered PM, and, if the attack is relevant to the work to be published, be able to justify related design decisions.  This does not mean a new "pervasive monitoring considerations" section is needed in IETF documentation.  It means that, if asked, there needs to be a good answer to the question "Is pervasive monitoring relevant to this work and if so, how has it been considered?"

It's safe to say that pervasive monitoring is very relevant to HTTP.

The Working Group had an extensive discussion regarding PM, most occurring during and between the August 2013 (Berlin) and January 2014 (Zurich) meetings. 

One proposal we considered was to require the use of TLS (through https:// URIs) for HTTP/2. However, some members of the community pushed back against this, on the grounds that it would be too onerous for some uses of HTTP (not necessarily CPU; cost and administration of certificates was cited as a burden, as was the follow-on disruption to applications, since transitioning from HTTP to HTTPS often requires non-trivial content changes, due to the way that the browser security model works).

The WG also discussed an "Opportunistic Security" approach to using TLS for http:// URIs (but without authentication). This was a bit controversial too, as some community members felt that having another, weaker kind of security defined harms the long-term deployment of "full" TLS. 

After discussion in June 2014 (New York), however, we agreed to adopt this document as an optional extension, but only with Experimental status: <http://httpwg.github.io/http-extensions/encryption.html>. It's expected that we'll ship it shortly after HTTP/2.

I would characterise the WG a having a somewhat uneasy (but also pragmatic) consensus on this outcome. 

To date, we've had one browser implementation express an intent to requiring https:// URLs for HTTP/2, one interested in https:// as well as Opportunistic Security for http:// URLs, and one that is interested in https:// as well as cleartext http://.

Note that most of the justification for our decision not to require https:// for HTTP/2 seems to be predicated on this part of our charter <http://datatracker.ietf.org/wg/httpbis/charter/>:

"The resulting specification(s) are expected to meet these goals for common existing deployments of HTTP[.]"

... i.e., we're not able to argue that people who can't use https:// should just stay on HTTP/1.1. This charter text was written before BCP188 (and the incidents leading up to it), but has considerable support in the WG.



3. Intellectual Property

Confirm that each author has stated that their direct, personal knowledge of any IPR related to this document has already been disclosed, in conformance with BCPs 78 and 79. Explain briefly the working group discussion about any IPR disclosures regarding this document, and summarize the outcome.

4. Other Points

Note any downward references (see RFC 3967) and whether they appear in the DOWNREF Registry (http://trac.tools.ietf.org/group/iesg/trac/wiki/DownrefRegistry), as these need to be announced during Last Call.

Check the IANA Considerations for clarity and against the checklist below. Note any registrations that require expert review, and say what's been done to have them reviewed before last call. Note any new registries that are created by this document and briefly describe the working group's discussion that led to the selection of the allocation procedures and policies (see RFC 5226) that were selected for them. If any new registries require expert review for future allocations, provide any public guidance that the IESG would find useful in selecting the designated experts (private comments may be sent to the Area Director separately).

Explain anything else that the IESG might need to know when reviewing this document. If there is significant discontent with the document or the process, which might result in appeals to the IESG or especially bad feelings in the working group, explain this in a separate email message to the responsible Area Director.

Checklist

This section is not meant to be submitted, but is here as a useful checklist of things the document shepherd is expected to have verified before publication is requested from the responsible Area Director. If the answers to any of these is "no", please explain the situation in the body of the writeup.

Does the shepherd stand behind the document and think the document is ready for publication?
Is the correct RFC type indicated in the title page header?
Is the abstract both brief and sufficient, and does it stand alone as a brief summary?
Is the intent of the document accurately and adequately explained in the introduction?
Have all required formal reviews (MIB Doctor, Media Type, URI, etc.) been requested and/or completed?
Has the shepherd performed automated checks -- idnits (see http://www.ietf.org/tools/idnits/ and the Internet-Drafts Checklist), checks of BNF rules, XML code and schemas, MIB definitions, and so on -- and determined that the document passes the tests? (In general, nits should be fixed before the document is sent to the IESG. If there are reasons that some remain (false positives, perhaps, or abnormal things that are necessary for this particular document), explain them.)
Has each author stated that their direct, personal knowledge of any IPR related to this document has already been disclosed, in conformance with BCPs 78 and 79?
Have all references within this document been identified as either normative or informative, and does the shepherd agree with how they have been classified?
Are all normative references made to documents that are ready for advancement and are otherwise in a clear state?
If publication of this document changes the status of any existing RFCs, are those RFCs listed on the title page header, and are the changes listed in the abstract and discussed (explained, not just mentioned) in the introduction?
If this is a "bis" document, have all of the errata been considered?
IANA Considerations:
Are the IANA Considerations clear and complete? Remember that IANA have to understand unambiguously what's being requested, so they can perform the required actions.
Are all protocol extensions that the document makes associated with the appropriate reservations in IANA registries?
Are all IANA registries referred to by their exact names (check them in http://www.iana.org/protocols/ to be sure)?
Have you checked that any registrations made by this document correctly follow the policies and procedures for the appropriate registries?
For registrations that require expert review (policies of Expert Review or Specification Required), have you or the working group had any early review done, to make sure the requests are ready for last call?
For any new registries that this document creates, has the working group actively chosen the allocation procedures and policies and discussed the alternatives? Have reasonable registry names been chosen (that will not be confused with those of other registries), and have the initial contents and valid value ranges been clearly specified?